---
layout: default
order: 11
title:  "quick popgen analyses in R"
date:   2019-08-05
time:   "16:30-17:00"
categories: main
instructor: "Pati"
materials: files/fakefile.txt
material-type: ""
lesson-type: Interactive
---
<a href="https://rdtarvin.github.io/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/main/2019/08/05/09-raxml-epi.html"><button>RAxML</button>	<a href="https://rdtarvin.github.io/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/"><button>Home</button></a>

quick popgen analyses using *adegenet* in R
===


For this lesson, we will be using a couple of different (and pre-filtered) datasets!!  The *puma* dataset is based on a couple of papers that were recently published in **biorxiv**, and the *stream insect* dataset is based on a recent paper that came out in **Ecology Letters**. 

First, let's take a look at our structure file format (and download the [.stru file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rdtarvin/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/master/files/pumas-CO.stru)), as well as our `.R` file [found here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rdtarvin/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/master/files/adegenet-new.R). <br>

<summary>There are a few options of how to download these files, how will you do it?</summary>
<details>right click and save, using curl, or open and then copy/paste into BBEdit?</details>

Now, let's get started with our `R` code. First we need to load the libraries that will be used: 

	library("adegenet")
	library("ggplot2")


Now, we import our first SNP dataset, Colorado pumas, and name it ***myFile*** by writing:

	myFile <- import2genind("pumas-CO.stru")
	
Then `R` will ask you to type the answers to these questions directly in the `R Console`:  

- Question: How many genotypes are there? *(inds*) **Answer**:134 
- Question: How many markers are there? *(SNPs)* **Answer**: 12456
- Question: Which column contains the population factor ('0' if absent)? **Answer**:2
- Question: Which other optional columns should be read (press 'return' when done)? **Press return**
- Question: Which row contains the marker names ('0' if absent)? **Answer**:1
- Question: Are genotypes coded by a single row (y/n)? **Answer**: n

If all questions were answered correctly, then it should give you the following message: 

	 Converting data from a STRUCTURE .stru file to a genind object... 
	 
Once imported, you can look at your transformed (summarized) *genind* file that the package `adegenet` uses, by typing: 

	myFile

Now, we can run the code necessary for running a **Principal Components Analysis (PCA)**, but first we need to scale our missing data:

	X <- scaleGen(myFile, NA.method="zero")
	pca1<-dudi.pca(X,cent=FALSE,scale=FALSE,scannf=FALSE,nf=3)
	
We define our plotting colors (so that pop1=darkgreen and pop2=darkblue), and then we generate our PCA scatterplot and our PC eigenvalues:

	myCol <-c("darkgreen","darkblue")
	s.class(pca1$li,pop(myFile), col=myCol)
	add.scatter.eig(pca1$eig[1:20], 3,1,2)
	
Now we are interested in finding potential migrant pumas between our populations, so we want to see where individual labels fall within the PCA plot:
	
	s.label(pca1$li)
	
Hm, that's not very informative. Let's try running a **Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components (DAPC)**, which tries to maximize the difference among pre-defined groups based on the Principal Components. 

	dapc1<-dapc(X,pop(myFile))
	summary(dapc1)
	scatter(dapc1)

	
Finally, we can visualize the DAPC as a **compoplot**, which is analogous to **STRUCTURE** analyses, where each bar is an individual an the colors are its probability of belonging to a specific group, or similarly, probability of admixture. 

	compoplot(dapc1,posi="bottomright",lab="", ncol=1,xlab="individuals") 
	
Now we can clearly identify and visualize both migrant individuals and admixed individuals as well. But, it's still impossible to know which individual ID belongs to migrants and to admixed, so we now type:
	
	assignplot(dapc1, subset=1:40)		
	assignplot(dapc1, subset=41:80)
	assignplot(dapc1, subset=81:100)
	assignplot(dapc1, subset=101:134)

Now we can clearly identify each migrant individual. 



<a href="https://rdtarvin.github.io/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/main/2019/08/05/09-raxml-epi.html"><button>RAxML</button>	<a href="https://rdtarvin.github.io/IBS2019_Genomics-of-Biodiversity/"><button>Home</button></a>
